The Proteome of the Dentate Terminal Zone of the Perforant Path Indicates Presynaptic Impairment in Alzheimer Disease. 
Synaptic dysfunction is an early pathogenic event in Alzheimer disease (AD) that contributes to network disturbances and cognitive decline. Some synapses are more vulnerable than others, including the synapses of the perforant path, which provides the main excitatory input to the hippocampus. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the dysfunction of these synapses, we performed an explorative proteomic study of the dentate terminal zone of the perforant path. The outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, where the perforant path synapses are located, was microdissected from five subjects with AD and five controls. The microdissected tissues were dissolved and digested by trypsin. Peptides from each sample were labeled with different isobaric tags, pooled together and pre-fractionated into 72 fractions by high-resolution isoelectric focusing. Each fraction was then analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. We quantified the relative expression levels of 7322 proteins, whereof 724 showed significantly altered levels in AD. Our comprehensive data analysis using enrichment and pathway analyses strongly indicated that presynaptic signaling, such as exocytosis and synaptic vesicle cycle processes, is severely disturbed in this area in AD, whereas postsynaptic proteins remained unchanged. Among the significantly altered proteins, we selected three of the most downregulated synaptic proteins; complexin-1, complexin-2 and synaptogyrin-1, for further validation, using a new cohort consisting of six AD and eight control cases. Semi-quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining confirmed decreased levels of complexin-1, complexin-2 and synaptogyrin-1 in the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus in AD. Our in-depth proteomic analysis provides extensive knowledge on the potential molecular mechanism underlying synaptic dysfunction related to AD and supports that presynaptic alterations are more important than postsynaptic changes in early stages of the disease. The specific synaptic proteins identified could potentially be targeted to halt synaptic dysfunction in AD.
Alzheimer disease (AD)1 is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder and the most common cause of dementia that affects 50-60% of all dementia cases. AD is characterized by its underlying neuropathological process including the accumulation of amyloid plaques that are composed of amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta), and neurofibrillary tangles consisting of hyperphosphorylated tau protein, and neurodegeneration. Over the past decades, substantial progress has been made in elucidating potential mechanisms underlying AD pathogenesis including mitochondrial dysfunction, autophagy, excitotoxicity, and inflammation. However, there is still an urgency to decipher early pathogenic processes in order to develop disease-modifying therapeutics. Recently, more attention has been devoted to synaptic dysfunction, because synapse loss and decreased levels of synaptic proteins in AD brains strongly correlate with the degree of cognitive decline. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the synaptic dysfunction are largely unknown.
The hippocampal formation, consisting of the cornu ammonis (CA) regions of the hippocampus, the dentate gyrus (DG) and the subiculum, plays a crucial role in episodic memory formation and spatial learning. The highly laminated entorhinal cortex provides the major excitatory inputs to the hippocampus through the perforant path (Fig. 1A). The axons of the perforant path mainly arise from the layer II and III entorhinal neurons. Although axons from layer II terminate primarily on the dendritic spines of granule cells located strictly in the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer (ML) of the DG, those arising from layer III terminate on the dendrites of CA1 pyramidal neurons. Extensive research has shown i) the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles both in the entorhinal cortex and in the ML of the DG, ii) dramatic loss of entorhinal neurons, especially in the layer II, and iii) decreased number of synapses in the outer ML of the DG in AD brains. These findings suggest that AD-related pathologic alterations could damage the connectivity between the hippocampal formation and entorhinal cortex, and therefore, could contribute to cognitive impairment. Elucidating the mechanisms underlying this disconnectivity is therefore of utmost importance.
Overview of experimental workflow of the study.A, A schematic illustration of the major hippocampal circuits. The molecular layer (ML) of the dentate gyrus (DG) consists of inner (IML), middle (MML) and outer molecular layer (OML). The perforant path provides the main excitatory input of the hippocampus. The fibers of the layer II perforant path terminate in the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG (highlighted in red). B, The MML and OML of the DG was isolated from five sporadic AD and five control cases using laser microdissection. The microdissected tissue was then dissolved, digested, and the resulting peptides from the ten samples were labeled with ten different isobaric tags (TMT10plex 126-131Da), and pre-fractionated into 72 fractions using HiRIEF with the broad range pH 3-10 IPG drystrip. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS. DEqMS was used for statistical analysis and proteins were further subjected to different enrichment and pathway analysis tools, using GSEA, GOrilla and IPA. Lastly, the expression of three proteomic hits (CPLX1, CPLX2, and SYNGR1) was confirmed in a new cohort consisting of five AD and seven control cases using immunohistochemistry.
Functional synapses are crucial for formation of memory and learning. Synaptic transmission requires a series of interactions between synaptic vesicle (SV) proteins, presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane proteins. To date, a number of synaptic proteins involved in presynaptic (RAB3A, SNAP25, septin-5, SV2A, synapsin I, synaptophysin, synaptotagmin, syntaxin-1a) and postsynaptic mechanisms (drebrin, neurogranin, NMDA and AMPA receptors, PSD95, synaptopodin) has been found to be altered in AD brains - emphasizing that synaptic integrity is diminished in AD.
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has a great potential to investigate changes in protein expression in an unbiased manner, and therefore, could lead to identification of proteins underlying disease mechanisms. Several research groups have applied mass spectrometry to elucidate changes in the proteome of different brain regions including the hippocampus. Additionally, a few studies have investigated the proteome of the hippocampal subfields that were microdissected from AD brains, such as CA1 pyramidal neurons, CA4, CA1 and subiculum. However, to our knowledge, no proteomic study has been performed aiming to gain a better understanding of the synaptic dysfunction of the vulnerable perforant path synapses. In order to reach this goal, we microdissected the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG, where these synapses are located, and performed state-of-the-art mass spectrometry. Our in-depth proteome analysis resulted in an identification of many synaptic proteins that shows altered expression levels in AD brains. Interestingly, there was an over-representation of presynaptic proteins among the decreased proteins. For three of these proteins, complexin-1 (CPLX1), complexin-2 (CPLX2) and synaptogyrin-1 (SYNGR1), the decreased expression in the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG in AD was confirmed in another cohort of AD and control cases, using immunohistochemical staining.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
This study consists of two stages in which we first studied the proteome of the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG in the exploratory cohort of five AD and five neurologically healthy control cases using an unbiased MS approach, and then performed an immunohistochemical analysis of three identified proteins in the verification cohort of an additional five AD and seven neurologically healthy control cases. The relatively low number of biological replicates used in the proteomics study were chosen because of the extensive work-load required to perform laser microdissection (LMD), and the aim to reach as deep as possible into the proteome through extensive fractionation performed with the high resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) protocol (72 fractions) before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). No technical replicates were performed, primarily because of very limited amount of clinical material, but also as our previous experience show very low technical variability between MS runs using HiRIEF LC-MS. The validity of the cohort was, however, confirmed by the low variability between samples and the fact that AD and control samples separated well in a principal component analysis (PCA) (Fig. 2A).
The hypothesis tested for each protein was that they were differentially expressed in AD samples compared with control samples. As we cannot assume normal distribution in the data using Shapiro-Wilk test, a non-parametric statistical method, DEqMS (Differential Expression analysis of quantitative Mass Spectrometry data, Zhou et al., manuscript under consideration for publication elsewhere, R package in Bioconductor) was used. DEqMS works on top of limma package and considers the detected number of peptide spectra matches (PSMs) per peptide while calculating t-statistics. Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for correction for multiple hypothesis testing. An overview of the experimental workflow is shown in Fig. 1. The details of the experimental design and statistical rationale are explained in each subsection.
Case Selection
Frozen hippocampal tissues were obtained from five sporadic AD and five control cases from the Netherlands Brain Bank (Exploratory cohort). AD cases were clinically diagnosed according to previously published research criteria, and definitive diagnosis was confirmed pathologically by using immunohistochemical staining against amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. We selected AD cases with relatively early stages of AD pathology (AD Braak stage 4 and amyloid deposits stage C). Control cases showed no sign of neurological or psychiatric disorders and presented little or no pathological alterations beyond normal age-appropriate changes including a few plaques and tangles (AD Braak stage 0-2 and amyloid deposits stage 0-B). For immunohistochemical analysis, we obtained a different set of paraffin-embedded hippocampal sections from five AD and seven control cases from the Carroll A. Campbell Jr. Neuropathology Laboratory (CCNL) Brain Bank at the Medical University of South Carolina (Verification cohort). Each of these cases in the verification cohort had undergone a full neuropathological diagnosis including Braak and CERAD assessments. All cases in the respective cohorts were used throughout the studies. Demographic characteristics of all cases used in this study are shown in supplemental Table S1. All donors or their next-of-kin gave informed consent. This study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm (2015/18/03-31/02) and had also obtained Institutional Review Board approvals by the VU Medical Center and the Medical University of South Carolina.
Preparation of Tissue Samples for LMD
Consecutive sections (20 mum) were cut from the frozen hippocampal tissues using a cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) and mounted on polyethylene naphthalate membrane coated slides (1.0 PEN(D), Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). Slides were air-dried for 5 min, fixed in 75% ethanol for 1 min and stained with toluidine blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) for 1 min. Slides were rinsed with distilled water, air-dried and finally stored at -20 degreesC overnight. Toluidine blue stains the nucleus of all types of cells and allowed us to identify the ML of the DG which is located between the dentate granule cell layer and the hippocampal fissure. The outer two-thirds of the ML, covering the middle and the outer ML, was microdissected using LMD 6000/7000 (Leica Microsystem). To obtain enough amount of tissue for downstream proteomics approach, ~0.6 mm3 of microdissected tissues were collected from 20-30 sections per case. No obvious anatomical differences were observed between the first and the last section during LMD. Finally, the microdissected tissues were stored at -20 degreesC until further use.
Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry
The microdissected tissue was dissolved in SDS-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 25 mm Hepes pH 7.6, 1 mm DTT). Lysates were heated at 95 degreesC for 5 min and then sonicated for 1 min to shear DNA. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g to remove cell debris. The supernatant was collected and alkylated with 4 mm chloroacetamide. A modified Sera-Mag SP3 protocol was performed for sample clean-up. The SP3 beads-protein mixture was digested first by Lys-C (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts) for 16 h prior to trypsin digestion (16 h). Finally, the peptides were eluted from the beads-protein mixture. Peptide concentration was measured by DC-protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California), and 45 mug of peptides from each sample were labeled with ten different amine-reactive isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTs) (TMT10plex 126-131Da, Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of ~2 mug was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 1 mug was injected on the LC-MS to determine the labeling efficiency for each TMT-tag. Finally, the sample were pooled, and sample clean-up was applied by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex, Torrance, California), and purified samples were dried in a SpeedVac.
HiRIEF Separation
The pre-fractionation was done using HiRIEF. The pooled sample (450 mug) was dissolved in 250 mul of 8 m urea and 1% IPG pharmalyte (broad range pH 3-10, GE Healthcare, Chicago, Illinois), and the IPG drystrip was rehydrated overnight. The peptides were focused on the gel strip based on their isoelectric point and eluted into 72 contiguous fractions, as described previously.
Mass Spectrometry
For each LC-MS run of a HiRIEF fraction, the auto-sampler (UltiMate(TM) 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Scientific Dionex) dispensed 20 mul of mobile phase A (95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid) into the corresponding well of the microtitre plate, and 10 mul were injected to the LC-MS. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 mum x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 mum, 100Ang), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 mum, 100Ang, 75 mum x 50 cm). At a constant flow of 250 nl/min, the curved gradient went from 2% mobile phase B (5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) up to 40% solvent B in each fraction as shown in the supplemental Table S2, followed by a steep increase to 100% solvent B in 5 min. Online liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1700 mass to charge ratio (m/z)) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top five ions using higher energy collision dissociation at 30-40% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control targets were 1 x 106 for MS1 and 1 x 105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150-200 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.
Peptide and Protein Identification
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) and Percolator (v2.08), where search results from eight subsequent fractions were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform, including 51,153 entries. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids, a maximum charge of 6 and maximum 2 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications were TMT10plex on lysine residues and peptide N termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0). PSMs found at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were used to infer gene identities. Protein quantification was based on TMT10plex reporter ions and calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides that are unique to a gene symbol was then used for quantification. Only one unique peptide was required to identify a protein, and a protein FDR cut-off of 1% was applied to the list of gene-centric proteins using the picked-FDR method. Peptide sequences, m/z, modifications, peptide identification scores, accession numbers, number of peptides, percentage coverage and quantification measurements for each peptide and protein has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium using the PRIDE repository (dataset identifier: PXD014557). Proteins that were not identified in all 10 cases were excluded in the analysis.
Statistical Analysis
Alterations in average protein expression between AD and control cases were calculated using DEqMS package in R (Zhou et al., manuscript under consideration for publication elsewhere), because the data did not show normal distribution using Shapiro-Wilk test. DEqMS works on top of limma package and considers the detected number of PSMs per peptide while calculating t-statistics. DEqMS is available at Bioconductor, and the package is also deposited at GitHub (https://github.com/yafeng/DEqMS). Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for multiple hypothesis testing and a cut-off level of 10% FDR was applied.
Multivariate data analyses were performed to find the biggest variation in our dataset using an unsupervised PCA in SIMCA v15. A heat map of differentially expressed proteins (log2 fold change -/+ 0.7 and FDR <10%) was generated using Morpheus (Broad Institute) and hierarchical clustering with complete linkage based on Pearson distance metrics was applied to visualize the expression profile between AD and control cases. To compare demographic characteristics (including age, gender and postmortem interval (PMI), pH and ApoE) between AD and control groups, we did univariate analyses using Mann Whitney test in GraphPad PRISM 7.0 (San Diego, CA). Statistical analysis of semi-quantitative densitometry assessment of immunohistochemical staining was carried out using Mann Whitney test in GraphPad PRISM 7.0 (San Diego, CA).
Bioinformatics Analysis
Enrichment Analyses
To have an overview of which biological processes might be affected in the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG in AD, we used gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA, Broad Institute). This type of analysis is based on the molecular signature database (v6.1) that contains gene sets derived from gene ontology (GO) annotations. We ran a running-sum statistic method, in which all of the identified genes were ranked from the most increased to the most decreased expression regardless of their p- and FDR-values (GO database from 16-02-2019). Ontologies with p < 0.01 and FDR <5% were considered significantly enriched which is considerably more stringent than the GSEA guideline. Additionally, we performed a second type of enrichment analysis using the GOrilla tool (GO database from 27-04-2019). Two unranked lists of proteins, a target list consisting of differentially expressed proteins (FDR <10%) and a background list, which is all the identified proteins, were uploaded. We performed this analysis for decreased and increased proteins separately. Ontologies with FDR <5% were considered statistically significant. Both in GSEA and GOrilla tools, Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to calculate FDR-values.
Pathway Analyses
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used for systemic analysis of our dataset in order to interpret our findings in a biological context. AD/C protein ratio (log2) of all quantified proteins, p- and FDR-values were uploaded into the IPA, and core analysis was performed. We allowed both direct and indirect relationships and a search on published data carried out in mouse, rat and human species, and applied 10% FDR cut-off to avoid having relations that could occur just by chance. Differentially expressed proteins were then analyzed in three categories: biological functions, enriched molecular networks, and upstream regulators. For each biological function and upstream regulator, IPA calculates a p value using right-tailed Fisher's exact test and p < 0.01 is considered statistically significant. Moreover, IPA makes a prediction about the activation state by calculating a z-score, which are considered significant if z-score >2 or z-score  30%), as exemplified by CPLX1, CPLX2, vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (SLC17A6), SYNGR1, RAB3B, NCS1, SYNGR3, GRM4, and RAB3A (Fig. 5). Thus, some specific proteins are likely to be more important for proper presynaptic function than others. Even though many of the above-mentioned proteins have previously been shown to be presynaptic, we cannot rule out the possibility that they might be also expressed at the postsynaptic terminal. For further validation experiments, we selected three proteins (CPLX1, CPLX2, SYNGR1) that are presynaptic. Complexins interact with SNARE proteins and synaptotagmins and are important regulators of SV fusion. In support of our findings, reduced levels of CPLX1 and CPLX2 has been previously observed in the superior temporal cortex, in the hippocampus and the inferior temporal cortex of AD cases. SYNGR1 is an abundant protein that is expressed on SVs. Although its role remains to be elucidated, SYNGR1 is thought to modulate SV cycle and affect neurotransmitter release properties. SYNGR1 has not been studied extensively in postmortem brain tissue, but decreased levels of SYNGR1 has been detected in temporal cortex and in CA1 of AD cases. We confirmed the decreased expression of CPLX1, CPLX2 and SYNGR1 in another cohort of AD and control cases, using immunohistochemistry.
Schematic overview of presynaptic proteins that were altered in AD. The "synaptic vesicle pathway" (hsa04721) was modified from KEGG, and the proteins with altered expression in AD in our MS dataset were highlighted in different shades of green according to their ratio. The proteins with dashed line were added to the original pathway.
Pathway analysis by IPA suggested involvement of processes related to seizures, ataxia and tremor processes based on the expression profile of the relevant proteins that were previously associated with these processes in the literature. Early hyperactivity has been detected in the medial temporal lobe in subjects with presymptomatic familial AD and mild cognitive impairment, which could explain why seizures are observed in AD patients. Additionally, motor signs such as tremor and bradykinesia can accompany AD and be indicative of worsening of the cognitive and especially the functional decline. Interestingly, phosphorylation of proteins was also found to be increased in AD. For example, calcineurin subunit B (PPP3R1) and serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2CA), which both have been shown to dephosphorylate tau, showed decreased expression in AD, in agreement with the presence of neurofibrillary tangles in this area. Enrichment analyses done by GSEA and GOrilla showed an activation of biological processes that are involved in regulation of gene expression, translational initiation, ribosome biogenesis, and RNA processing. These processes contain number of ribosomal proteins (e.g. hnRNPs, RPLs, RPSs) and eukaryotic translation initiation factors. In contrast to our findings, many ribosomal proteins have been previously shown to be decreased in AD brain. These discrepancies could occur because of the local alterations in our region of interest. Activation of cell spreading and shape change of tumor cell lines as well as cell survival processes are perhaps surprising in a neurodegeneration context. However, many of these proteins, e.g. GFAP, CD44, ITGB1, EGFR, and GAP43, are also involved in other processes and it is possible that IPA predicted the above-mentioned pathways because of a potential over-representation of published literature in the cancer field. IPA can also predict upstream regulators of the altered proteins. One such upstream regulator identified by IPA was Nrf2, which is a transcription factor that mediates cellular defense mechanisms. In response to oxidative stress, Nrf2 translocates into the nucleus and targets the genes that contain anti-oxidant response elements. Extensive research suggests a disruption of Nrf2-mediated transcription pathway in aging and neurodegeneration. Ramsey and colleagues have observed decreased levels of nuclear Nrf2 in hippocampus of AD cases, whereas increased level of Nrf2 but decreased levels of its target genes were found in a meta-analysis of PD and AD microarray studies. Given the important roles of Abeta and hyperphosphorylated tau in AD pathogenesis, it was also interesting that APP and MAPT were predicted as upstream regulators by IPA. However, no activation state was predicted and thus we can only conclude that there is a relation between APP/MAPT and the altered proteins and there is no consensus in the literature on how they affect each other.
Last, we compared our findings with other proteomic studies that were done using brain homogenates of different regions from subjects with AD. We observed that number of proteins were altered in a similar way, as exemplified by decreased levels of STX1A, SYNGR1, SV2A, and SEPT5 in the temporal neocortex; decreased STX1B, SNAP91, PACSIN1 and increased GFAP, MAOB, VIM, and AQP4 levels in the microdissected CA1 and subiculum; decreased level of LRFN2 in the prefrontal cortex. On the other hand, some alterations were unique for our study, indicating that some changes might occur globally in AD brain whereas others are region-specific. A potential limitation of our study, especially compared with studies in which synaptosomal preparations have been used, is the fact that our samples, although enriched in excitatory synapses, most probably contain other structures, such as axons, dendrites, glial cells and interneurons like MOPP cells. On the other hand, our study provides extensive information on biological activities that were found to be affected in this very specific highly vulnerable area in AD. Furthermore, the high number of synaptic proteins identified in our study indicates that we indeed microdissected a synapse rich area. The small sample size is another limitation of this study. However, we observed good separation between AD and control cases in the PCA plot, suggesting that the observed alterations in protein levels most likely are driven by AD pathogenesis. Furthermore, the alterations of CPLX1, CPLX2 and SYNGR1 were confirmed in another cohort, using immunohistochemistry.
In conclusion, we studied the proteome of the dentate terminal zone of the highly vulnerable perforant path in postmortem human brain tissue. Our in-depth proteomic analysis indicates a presynaptic impairment in the region of interest in AD, affecting processes like exocytosis and SV docking and specific proteins like CPLX1, CPLX2 and SYNGR1. Our extensive proteomics data and bioinformatic analysis supports the notion that presynaptic signaling is indeed affected in early stages of AD, and therefore, targeting presynaptic proteins might be crucial for future therapeutic strategies to slow or halt cognitive decline.
