Categorization of Phosphorylation Site Behavior during the Diauxic Shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Protein phosphorylation has long been recognized as an essential regulator of protein activity, structure, complex formation, and subcellular localization among other cellular mechanisms. However, interpretation of the changes in protein phosphorylation is difficult. To address this difficulty, we measured protein and phosphorylation site changes across 11 points of a time course and developed a method for categorizing phosphorylation site behavior relative to protein level changes using the diauxic shift in yeast as a model and TMT11 sample multiplexing. We classified quantified proteins into behavioral categories that reflected differences in kinase activity, protein complex structure, and growth and metabolic pathway regulation across different phases of the diauxic shift. These data also provide a valuable resource for the study of fermentative versus respiratory growth and set a new benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics for the diauxic shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022741.
INTRODUCTION
Post-transcriptional regulation by protein phosphorylation is essential for proper cellular functions and response to stimuli. Although recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics have greatly increased the number of phosphorylation events that can be observed, interpretation of changes at these sites is difficult. Part of this difficulty arises from the fact that changes observed at a given phosphorylation site may arise from changes in stoichiometry at that site (phosphorylation levels change, while protein levels are constant), from changes in protein abundance (protein levels change at constant stoichiometry, resulting in changes in phosphopeptide levels), or from both these processes together. Some studies have addressed this issue by determining site occupancy; while accurate and useful, these techniques can be difficult to implement as they require additional treatment with phosphatase.
The diauxic shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, or the transition from a log growth phase while utilizing glucose to a stationary phase upon glucose exhaustion, is an important model for understanding proliferative growth. Because of the large number of changes induced upon nutrient exhaustion, this paradigm has been used to study genome- and transcriptome-level regulation. Previously, our lab conducted a study of the temporal dynamics of protein changes during the diauxic shift in S. cerevisiae, where over 4500 proteins were quantified across 10 time points, and the set of Hap2-regulated proteins was identified. Recently, an investigation reported phosphorylation dynamics during the diauxic shift at four time points using label-free quantitation and demonstrated regulation of the fatty acyl chain length by phosphorylation.
In our previous analyses, the Hotelling T2 statistic has proven useful to determine the degree to which protein expression changes across a time course. The Hotelling T2 statistic is a generalization of Student's t-distribution for multivariate hypothesis testing. When applied to longitudinal data in the timecourse R package, this statistic shows greater differences across a time course than the F-distribution commonly used in ANOVA.
In this study, we leveraged changes in protein levels across a time course to determine if and how phosphorylation levels change relative to their respective proteins. We extended the temporal resolution to 11 time points with the use of TMT11 reagents and additionally report the quantification of over 11,000 phosphorylation sites. We also developed a computational method based on Hotelling's T2 statistic derived from the timecourse R package to categorize phosphorylation sites by their behavior relative to their protein level changes. This categorization enabled the identification of kinase activities responsible for site behavior and how this behavior translates to pathways, leading to a better understanding of protein regulation by phosphorylation. These data also represent a benchmark for temporal phosphorylation dynamics in yeast and are thus a valuable resource for the community.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Yeast Culture
Yeast strain BY4742 was cultured in synthetic complete media supplemented with 20 g/L glucose and grown at 30 degreesC with shaking at 250 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifuging samples at 4000g for 5 min, washed with water, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The optical density (OD) was measured using a Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000.
Phosphoproteomic Workflow
Frozen cell pellets were processed using the streamlined TMT labeling protocol. Samples were lysed in 8 M urea in 200 mM N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N'-propanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5 with protease (Pierce A32953) and phosphatase (Pierce A32957) inhibitors, mixed with yeast disruption beads (BioSpec 11079105z), and shaken on a bead beater (BioSpec) for 60 s at 4 degreesC three times with 60 s rest in between. Lysates were cleared by centrifuging at 16,000g for 10 min at 4 degreesC. Protein levels were determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay. Samples were then reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5 mM DTT, followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation of 200 mug of protein (11-plex). Pellets were reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and digested overnight with LysC (Wako 129-02541) at 1:100 while shaking at room temperature, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce 90305) at 1:100 while shaking at 37 degreesC. Anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell AS017-0100) was added to ~30%, followed by labeling with the TMT11 (Thermo A37727) reagent. 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure that the labeling efficiency was >97% and that the samples were mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labeled peptide samples were desalted using a 200 mg Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054925), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Samples were enriched using the Pierce High Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (A32992) according to the manufacturer's specifications, except that elutions were carried out into tubes containing 100 muL of 10% formic acid before rotary evaporation. The flow-through and elution fractions were dried in a rotary evaporator, followed by desalting on a 200 mg SepPak cartridge (flow-through, Waters WAT054925) or stage-tip (enriched). The flow-through fraction was then reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate for basic reverse-phase fractionation on an Agilent 300Extend-C18 column (3.5 mum, 4.6 x 250 mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13 to 42% of buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) 4 alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Assuming that adjacent fractions contain overlapping peaks, only 12 nonadjacent samples were analyzed using the mass spectrometer. The pooling scheme has been illustrated previously. Each eluted fraction was desalted via a StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis.
Mass spectra were recorded on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (100 mum i.d., Accucore, 2.6 mum, 150 Aa, packed in-house) using a 90 min gradient (from 5 to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nL/min. Each analysis used an SPS-MS3-based TMT method, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2-based quantification. MS1 data were obtained using the Orbitrap [120,000 resolution; maximum injection time, 50 ms; automatic gain control (AGC), 4 x 105; 400-1400 m/z]. Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing, and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation, quadrupole ion trap analysis, an AGC of 2 x 104, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 34, a q-value of 0.25, a maximum injection time of 35 ms, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z using a Top10 method. MS3 scans were obtained in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, an NCE of 45%, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an AGC setting of 1 x 105.
Mass spectra were processed using a COMET-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt Yeast database (downloaded July 2020) using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and a 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (11-plex: +229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (+0.9840 Da), and phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) were set as variable modifications. For any fragment ion phosphorylation modification, a neutral loss of -97.9769 Da was also analyzed. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 mDa) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to the manufacturer's specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labeling channels (column normalized). Last, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of quantified peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.
The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD022741.
RESULTS
Comprehensive 11-Plex Temporal Phosphoproteomic Profiling of the Diauxic Shift
We harvested triplicate cultures of yeast (BY4742, MATalpha his3Delta1 leu2Delta0 lys2Delta0 ura3Delta0) at 11 time points over 33 h after inoculation to capture the full profile of phosphoproteomic changes during the diauxic shift (Figure 1A). Glucose was exhausted after 17 h and coincided with a decreased growth rate (OD600) (Figure 1B). After harvest, samples were lysed and proteolytically digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Each time point was labeled with a different TMT11-plex reagent and mixed; by combining each 11-point time course into its own TMT11-plex, time points can be directly compared in one MS experiment and also allow comparison across replicates. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe-NTA spin columns, and the unenriched flow-through was separated into 12 fractions using basic pH reversed-phase chromatography. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer using an SPS-MS3-based method; phosphorylation-enriched fractions were analyzed using a 3 h gradient, while unenriched fractions were analyzed using a 75 min gradient (Figure 1A). This analysis identified and quantified 4672 proteins and 11,004 phosphorylation sites (Figure 1C-F) (Table S1). Across triplicate experiments, 7143 or 64.9% of phosphorylation sites were observed in at least 2 replicates, while 4613 or 98.7% of protein observations were included in at least 2 replicates.
In analyzing proteins and phosphorylation sites that appeared in all three replicates, phosphorylation site changes were normalized by the protein expression value at a given time point (protein-normalized phosphorylation sites or PN-phosphorylation sites). About 59% of proteins and 75% of PN-phosphorylation sites were dynamically regulated over the time course (Figure 2A,B). Principle component analysis (PCA) tightly grouped biological replicates by time point (Figure 2C,D) and separated time points in an arc along PC1 and PC2. While the PN-phosphorylation sites for the 25, 29, and 33 h time points did not separate significantly by PC1 and PC2, they were separated by PC3 (Figures 2D and S1). Component 1 loadings for both proteins and PN-phosphorylation sites were enriched for the cell cycle-yeast KEGG pathway; however, the protein loadings also showed enrichment for the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, ribosome biogenesis, and various metabolic processes, while the PN-phosphorylation site loadings showed enrichment for DNA replication, RNA transport, and MAPK-yeast signaling (Table S2).
Comparison to Murphy et al.
When comparing this study to our previous study of temporal protein dynamics during the diauxic shift, we saw a significant positive correlation between both the 33 h versus 5 h fold changes (Figure S2A) and the Hotelling T2 statistics (Figure S2B). The Spearman rank correlation coefficient comparing the 33 h versus 5 h fold changes was 0.658, while the correlation coefficient for Hotelling's T2 statistic was 0.610. Some differences between the T2 statistic values were expected as this study used 11 as opposed to 10 time points. Additionally, differences between studies may be the result of using a different strain (BY4742 vs DBY7286) and/or different media (synthetic complete vs YPD). These experimental differences resulted in a slightly shifted growth curve that reduced correlation especially at middle time points (13-21 h) (Figure S2C). Despite these differences, the overall shape of the data was generally reproducible between studies.
Categorization of Phosphorylation Site Behavior
We calculated the T2 ratio between the PN-phosphorylation site and protein Hotelling's T2 statistic to address whether a dynamically altered phosphorylation site was regulated by stoichiometry changes, protein level changes, or both. When compared to the fold change in the PN-phosphorylation site data between the 5 and 33 h time points (Figure 3) and after applying 2-fold cutoffs for both the fold change and T2 ratio, we were able to sort phosphorylation site behavior into 9 categories. In the top three categories, protein levels were relatively constant, while the PN-phosphorylation site values changed dramatically; these categories represent changes in the ratio of phosphorylated to nonphosphorylated protein and indicate changes in phosphorylation stoichiometry. The center three categories represent cases where the magnitude of change at the protein and PN-phosphorylation site levels was similar; in the center category, neither the protein nor the PN-phosphorylation site changed, whereas on the sides, the changes in protein and PN-phosphorylation were similar in magnitude. The bottom three categories were represented by large changes in protein levels; in the center category, the PN-phosphorylation site levels did not change, implying that the ratio of phosphorylated to nonphosphorylated protein remained the same, even though the protein levels varied, while on the sides, the PN-phosphorylation site levels also changed but not by the same magnitude. This analysis did not determine if the changes were in the same or opposite directions but just the magnitude of change in T2 ratio and the fold change between the 33 and 5 h time points.
Motif Analysis
To determine which kinases may be responsible for the phosphorylation activity in a given category, we performed a motif analysis using the pLogo tool. This analysis determined that CDKs are potentially the primary drivers of phosphorylation in the top left category where phosphorylation begins high and decreases over the time course and that the yeast homologue of AMPK, SNF1, is a candidate as a driver of the activity in the top right category, where phosphorylation begins low and increases across the time course (Figure 4A). Indeed, 58 and 30% of proteins in these categories, respectively, are known substrates of these kinases, with another seven and six sites, respectively, that match the kinase motif and are potential novel substrates. Interestingly, the center bottom category was enriched for the casein kinase 2 (CK2) motif (Figure 4A). Only 11% of the 749 proteins in this category are known CK2 substrates. However, an additional 101 sites on 88 proteins match the +1/+2/+3 D/E motif and are candidate substrates (Table S3). While this analysis suggests CDK, SNF1, and CK2 activity toward these categories, these hypotheses were not directly tested. Additional experiments with inhibitors or genetic alterations could provide support to this hypothesis. Similarly, while we identify potential novel substrates, additional experiments are required to directly test whether these candidates are bona fide substrates of these kinases. Motifs derived from the other categories were not informative beyond bleeding of the CDK and SNF1 motifs from the top left and top right categories into the center left and center right categories, respectively (Figure S3).
Two-Dimensional Enrichment Analysis
After assigning KEGG pathways and GO terms to the phosphoproteins from Figure 3, we performed two-dimensional (2D) enrichment analysis to examine which processes and pathways are affected by phosphorylation across the time course (Figure 4B, Table S4). 2D enrichment first determines which KEGG pathways and GO terms are enriched in the data set and then averages the values of the constituent members for each term across each axis. Using similar cutoffs to Figure 3, we can now sort pathways and GO terms into behavioral categories. For example, pathways and GO terms such as "DNA replication" and "positive regulation of G2/M transcription" are enriched in the top left category, while pathways and GO terms such as "translation initiation" and "fructose-6-phosphate metabolic process" are enriched in the top right category. As our motif analysis suggested CDK and SNF1 activity in these categories, these data suggest that it is likely that these kinases regulate these processes, although we cannot determine a priori whether this regulation is activating, inhibitory, or modulatory in a different manner (e.g., altering localization, complex formation or disassembly, and so forth, depending on the specific pathway or GO term).
There were, however, different ways a KEGG pathway or GO term could be classified in a particular category. If all the phosphorylation in a given pathway or complex points in a similar direction, the 2D enrichment category can be predictive of kinase activity. For example, the "RSC complex", involved in chromatin remodeling, is mostly phosphorylated in the top center and top right categories, resulting in the complex being located in the top right category in the 2D enrichment analysis (Figure 5A,B). Conversely, the "cell cycle-yeast" KEGG pathway was located in the center left category; however, looking at individual pathway members makes it clear that they are regulated in different ways. SWI4 and SWI6 are mostly phosphorylated in the top left and top center categories, suggesting regulation by CDKs, and together form the SWI/SNF complex to regulate G1/S phase genes (Figure 5C,D). SWI5, on the other hand, is phosphorylated in the bottom center category, suggesting structural phosphorylation by CK2 and functional regulation by changing protein amounts, and is responsible for promoting transcription of M to G1 phase genes (Figure 5C,D).
Regulation of Metabolism by Phosphorylation
In addition to the 2D analysis, we also investigated how glycolytic, gluconeogenic, and TCA cycle genes were regulated by phosphorylation and/or protein levels during the diauxic shift. Glycolytic protein levels were mostly stable, except for the two hexokinase isoforms HXK1 and GLK1. However, glycolytic proteins had significant phosphorylation changes in multiple categories (Figure 6A,B), suggesting that most regulation on these proteins was post-transcriptional rather than transcriptional. The gluconeogenesis-specific proteins FBP1 and PYC2 showed different methods of regulation. PYC2 seems to be regulated by phosphorylation as protein levels are relatively stable while phosphorylation at S513 increases; however, FBP1 protein levels increase dramatically as the time course progresses while phosphorylation at FBP1 S12 decreases (Figure 6C). In contrast to glycolytic proteins, very few phosphorylation events were observed on TCA cycle proteins, while the proteins themselves had significantly increased levels as the time course progressed (Figure 6D), suggesting regulation at the transcriptional, rather than post-transcriptional, level.
DISCUSSION
Post-transcriptional modification of proteins by phosphorylation is by nature dynamic, and a greater understanding of the temporal phosphorylation dynamics across abundant to depleted nutrient states provides insight into protein regulation and functions. As the diauxic shift in yeast provides a convenient model for the fermentative versus respiratory metabolism, changes in phosphorylation at conserved sites may provide insight into regulation under similar metabolic regimes in cancer. Our data also provide detailed temporal resolution at the protein and phosphorylation site levels, which captures the dynamic nature of protein expression and regulation.
While the present study confirmed many of the temporal protein profiles identified in the previous study from our group, such as the glycogen metabolism and ribosomal biogenesis, we also identified many complexes, pathways, and processes that were, either in part or entirely, regulated by phosphorylation. For example, the RSC complex, responsible for chromatin remodeling, significantly increased phosphorylation on multiple subunits as nutrients were depleted. As this phosphorylation coincided with the transcription and translation of the large number of proteins included in this response, these phosphorylation events were likely activating, allowing the machinery access to DNA for transcription. The "cell cycle-yeast" pathway is an example where some of the pathway was regulated entirely by phosphorylation (e.g., SWI 4/6, responsible for transcription of G1/S genes), while other parts were regulated by protein abundance with phosphorylation more likely providing a structural rather than regulatory function (SWI5, responsible for transcription of M/G1 genes). We observed a similar phenomenon in metabolic proteins; glycolytic protein levels remained relatively constant across the time course, while phosphorylation of these proteins was dynamic and varied as opposed to TCA cycle proteins where little phosphorylation was observed but protein levels increased significantly. Indeed, the T2 ratio for phosphorylation sites on glycolytic proteins was higher on average than the rest of the observed phosphorylation sites (0.50 vs -0.37, P < 0.0003), while the T2 value for TCA cycle proteins was significantly greater than the protein average (1999 vs 508, P < 0.0001).
Functional interpretation of phosphorylation site behavior in the top three categories and the center bottom category is fairly straightforward. It is clear that the proteins in the top three categories are being regulated by the ratio of phosphorylated to nonphosphorylated protein as the phosphorylation site abundances change without concurrent changes in protein levels. In the bottom center category, the phosphorylation levels at a given site are directly tied to the protein abundance, and determining how each of these sites regulates activity, whether by affecting changes in enzymatic activity, complex formation, subcellular localization, etc., requires additional investigation.
In contrast, interpretation of phosphorylation in the center and bottom left and center and bottom right categories is more nuanced. One possible explanation for behavior in these categories is that phosphorylation may inhibit the function of the small amount of the protein that is expressed. For example, in the bottom left category, phosphorylation may inhibit the small amount of expressed protein at the beginning of the time course; as protein levels increase without commensurate kinase activity, the amount of phosphorylated protein decreases relative to total protein enabling functions. The bottom right category may represent a similar logic, but with protein levels at the beginning of the time course high and phosphorylation low while phosphorylation increases, and protein levels decrease as the time course progresses. Additional studies are required to determine if the functional roles of these phosphorylation sites are consistent with this hypothesis.
During preparation of this article, an article appeared reporting a temporal profiling of 4 time points across the diauxic shift in yeast, observing >4200 proteins and >7900 phosphopeptides using label-free quantification. The overlap in the total number of sites was found to be 25% with 17.8% of sites deemed significant. This finding suggests that strain, media, and growth conditions had a significant effect on the observed phosphoproteomic differences. Within this overlapping set, there is generally good agreement (Figure S4A). However, the present study provides greater temporal resolution (11 vs 4 time points) and a greater number of proteins and phosphopeptides observed (>4600 proteins and >8500 phosphopeptides, which collapsed into 11,004 non-redundant phosphorylation sites). The greater number of time points enabled the identification of very transient changes in phosphorylation that may not have been captured with fewer time points. Of the 366 phosphorylation sites in the top center category (which contains transient phosphorylation events) that overlapped between data sets, 99 were identified as significantly changing in this analysis but not in the other (Figure S4B). Although some of these differences are likely due to differences in strain, media, and/or growth conditions, many are transient changes that fall between time points. Also, by comparing T2 ratios instead of just PN-phosphorylation site abundance, the present study was able to identify CK2 activity on proteins whose phosphorylation is directly tied to protein abundance in addition to the CDK and SNF1 activities that were observed in both studies. Thus, the present work not only represents a benchmark for temporal protein and phosphorylation dynamics and a resource for the community but also showcases a useful method for categorizing and interpreting phosphorylation events to aid our understanding of the myriad ways that phosphorylation can dynamically regulate protein functions.
